---
title: The Privacy Pass HTTP Authentication Scheme
abbrev: Privacy Pass Authentication
docname: draft-pauly-privacypass-auth-scheme-latest
category: std

ipr: trust200902
keyword: Internet-Draft

stand_alone: yes
pi: [toc, sortrefs, symrefs]

author:
 -
    ins: T. Pauly
    name: Tommy Pauly
    org: Apple Inc.
    street: One Apple Park Way
    city: Cupertino, California 95014
    country: United States of America
    email: tpauly@apple.com
 -
    ins: S. Valdez
    name: Steven Valdez
    org: Google LLC
    email: svaldez@chromium.org

--- abstract

This document defines an HTTP authentication scheme that can be used by clients
to redeem Privacy Pass tokens with an origin. It can also be used by origins to
challenge clients to present an acceptable Privacy Pass token.

--- middle

# Introduction {#introduction}

Privacy Pass tokens are unlinkable signatures that can be used to anonymously
validate a client (see {{?I-D.ietf-privacypass-architecture}}). A client
possessing such a token is able to prove that it was able to get a token
issued (based on some check from a token issuer, such as authentication or
solving a captcha) without allowing the entity redeeming the token to determine
the client's identity.

Different types of signatures, using different token issuance protocols, can
be used as Privacy Pass tokens.

This document defines a common HTTP authentication scheme ({{!RFC7235}}),
PrivateToken, that allows clients to redeem various kinds of Privacy Pass
tokens.

Clients and origins interact using this scheme to perform the token challenge
and token redemption flow. Clients use a token issuance protocol to actually
fetch tokens to redeem.

~~~
 Client                                   Origin

    <------------------------------ Challenge \
                                              |
+----------------------------------\          |
|                                  |          |
|  Issuance Protocol               |          |
|                                  |          |
+----------------------------------/          |
                                              |
     Redemption -------------------------- >  /
~~~
{: #fig-overview title="Token Architectural Components"}

In addition to working with different token issuance protocols, this scheme
supports both interactive (on-line challenges) and non-interactive (pre-fetched)
token redemption, as well as the ability to scope a token to a specific
resource or origin. Origin servers that request and redeem tokens can choose
which kinds of tokens are required, as appropriate for different use cases.

## Terminology

{::boilerplate bcp14}

This document uses the following terms to refer to various roles and functions
in the Privacy Pass architecture:

- Client: A client is a application or device, generally operated by a user,
that can be issued tokens via an issuance protocol, and can redeem these tokens
with an origin.

- Origin: An HTTP server that is able to redeem tokens presented by a client,
in order to validate the client without knowing the client's identity. When
used in a web context, this represents the origin the client is accessing.

- Token: A signed message that can be issued to a client and redeemed without
allowing token redemption to be linked to issuance.

- Interactive / non-interactive token: An interactive token signs a nonce
generated by an origin as part of a challenge for tokens. This means that
the client needs to be issued a new token for this challenge in order
to redeem it, and cannot pre-fetch a token. A non-interactive token
is one that can be pre-fetched.

- Issuance protocol: A protocol by which the client can receive tokens. Many
such protocols can exist, but they each include both a function of validating
or authenticating the client and a function of issuing a token to the client.

- Issuer name: The name that identifies a token issuer, which is an entity
that can generate tokens for a client using one or more issuance protocols.

- Issuer key: Keying material that can be used with an issuance protocol
to create a signed token.

- Token challenge: A requirement for tokens sent from an origin to a client, using
the "WWW-Authenticate" HTTP header. This may be a challenge for an interactive
token or a non-interactive token. A challenge defines the issuance protocol
and issuer name to use for a token.

- Token redemption: An action by which a client presents a token to an origin,
using the "Authorization" HTTP header.

# HTTP Authentication Scheme {#challenge-redemption}

Token redemption is performed using HTTP Authentication ({{!RFC7235}}), with
the scheme "PrivateToken". Origins challenge clients to present a token
from a specific issuer ({{challenge}}). Once a client has received a token
from that issuer, or already has a valid token available, it presents the
token to the origin ({{redemption}}).

## Token Challenge {#challenge}

Origins send a token challenge to Clients in an "WWW-Authenticate" header with
the "PrivateToken" scheme. This challenge includes a TokenChallenge message,
along with information about what keys to use when requesting a token from
the issuer.

The TokenChallenge message has the following structure:

~~~
struct {
    uint16_t token_type;
    opaque issuer_name<1..2^16-1>;
    opaque redemption_nonce<0..32>;
    opaque origin_name<0..2^16-1>;
} TokenChallenge;
~~~

The structure fields are defined as follows:

- "token_type" is a 2-octet integer, in network byte order. This type indicates
the issuance protocol used to generate the token. Values are registered
in an IANA registry, {{token-types}}.

- "issuer_name" is a string containing the name of the issuer. This is a
hostname that is used to identify the issuer that is allowed to issue
tokens that can be redeemed by this origin.

- "redemption_nonce" is an optional field. If present, it indicates that
a client needs to present an interactive token, generated specifically in
response to this challenge. If empty, the client can use a non-interactive
token. When present, this valid is a fresh 32-byte nonce generated by the
origin for each challenge.

- "origin_name" is an optional string containing the name of the origin.
This allows a token to be scoped to a specific origin. If empty, any non-origin
specific token can be redeemed.

When used in an authentication challenge, the "PrivateToken" scheme uses the
following attributes:

- "challenge", which contains a base64url-encoded {{!RFC4648}} TokenChallenge
value. This MUST be unique for every 401 HTTP response to prevent replay attacks.

- "issuer-key", which contains a base64url encoding of the SubjectPublicKeyInfo object
for use with the issuance protocol indicated by the challenge.

- "max-age", an optional attribute that consists of the number of seconds for which
the challenge will be accepted by the Origin.

Origins MAY also include the standard "realm" attribute, if desired. Issuance protocols
MAY require other attributes.

As an example, the WWW-Authenticate header could look like this:

~~~
WWW-Authenticate: PrivateToken challenge=abc..., issuer-key=123...
~~~

Upon receipt of this challenge, a client uses the message and keys in the
issuance protocol indicated by the token_type. If the TokenChallenge has a
token_type the client does not recognize or support, it MUST NOT parse or
respond to the challenge.

Note that it is possible for the WWW-Authenticate header to include multiple
challenges, in order to allow the Client to fetch a batch of multiple tokens
for future use.

For example, the WWW-Authenticate header could look like this:

~~~
WWW-Authenticate: PrivateToken challenge=abc..., issuer-key=123...,
PrivateToken challenge=def..., issuer-key=234...
~~~

## Token Redemption {#redemption}

The output of the issuance protocol is a token that corresponds to the origin's
challenge (see {{challenge}}). A token is a structure that begins with a two-octet
field that indicates a token type, which MUST match the token_type in the TokenChallenge
structure.

~~~
struct {
    uint16_t token_type;
    uint8_t nonce[32];
    uint8_t context[32];
    uint8_t key_id[32];
    uint8_t signature[Nk];
} Token;
~~~

The structure fields are defined as follows:

- "token_type" is a 2-octet integer, in network byte order. This value must
match the value in the challenge ({{challenge}}).

- "context" is a 32-octet message containing a client-generated random
nonce. The "nonce" and "context" values are both signed by "signature".

- "context" is a 32-octet message containing the hash of the original
TokenChallenge, SHA256(TokenChallenge). The "nonce" and "context" values
are both signed by "signature".

- "key_id" is a collision-resistant hash that identifies the issuer key
used to produce the signature. This is generated as SHA256(public_key), where
public_key is a DER-encoded SubjectPublicKeyInfo object carrying the public key.

- "signature" is a Nk-octet signature that covers the message, defined by
the token_type and corresponding issuance protocol.

When used for client authorization, the "PrivateToken" authentication
scheme defines one parameter, "token", which contains the base64url-encoded
Token struct. All unknown or unsupported parameters to "PrivateToken"
authentication credentials MUST be ignored.

Clients present this Token structure to Origins in a new HTTP request using
the Authorization header as follows:

~~~
Authorization: PrivateToken token=abc...
~~~

For token types that support public verifiability, origins verify the token
signature using the public key of the issuer, and validate that the signed
message matches the concatenation of the client nonce and the hash of a
valid TokenChallenge. For interactive tokens, origins store the nonces of
previous TokenChallenge structures in order to validate uniqueness.
A TokenChallenge MAY be bound to a specific HTTP session with client, but
origins can also accept tokens for valid challenges in new sessions.

If a client is unable to be issued a token, it MUST react to the challenge as
if it could not produce a valid Authorization response.

# Issuance Protocol Requirements

TODO: 

# User Interaction

When used in contexts like websites, origin servers that challenge clients for
tokens need to consider how to optimize their interaction model to ensure a
good user experience.

Tokens challenges can be performed without explicit user involvement, depending
on the issuance protocol. If tokens are scoped to a specific origin,
there is no need for per-challenge user interaction. Note that the issuance
protocol may separately involve user interaction if the client needs to be newly
validated.

The use of interactive tokens can add user-perceivable latency, since such
tokens cannot be pre-fetched. Origins SHOULD NOT block useful work on token
authentication. Instead, token authentication can be used in similar ways to
CAPTCHA validation today, but without the need for user interaction. If issuance
is taking a long time, a website could show an indicator that it is waiting,
or fall back to another method of user validation.

If an origin is requesting an unexpected number of tokens, such as requesting
token authentication more than once for a single website load, it can indicate
that the server is not functioning correctly, or is trying to attack or overload
the client or issuance servers. In such cases, the client SHOULD ignore
redundant token challengers, or else alert the user.

# Security Considerations {#sec-considerations}

TODO

# IANA Considerations {#iana}

## Authentication Scheme

This document registers the "PrivateToken" authentication scheme in the "Hypertext
Transfer Protocol (HTTP) Authentication Scheme Registry" established by {{!RFC7235}}.

Authentication Scheme Name: PrivateToken

Pointer to specification text: {{challenge-redemption}} of this document

## Token Type Registry {#token-types}

TODO: Create new registry for token types
